Docs/Object Storage (#1106)
iotaledger/goshimmer: docs/implementation_design/object_storage.md

# Object storage

> In GoShimmer `ObjectStorage`  is used as a base data structure for many data collections elements such as `branchStorage`, `conflictStorage`, `messageStorage` and others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In GoShimmer `ObjectStorage`  is used as a base data structure for many data collection elements such as `branchStorage`, `conflictStorage`, `messageStorage` and others.
```

It can be described by the following characteristics, it:
- is a manual cache which keeps objects in memory as long as consumers are using it
- uses key-value storage type 
- provides mutex options for guarding shared variables and preventing changing the object state by multiple goroutines at the same time
- takes care of  dynamic creation of different object types depending on the key, and the serialized data it receives through the utility `objectstorage.Factory`

> - helps with multiple `ObjectStorage` instances creation from the same package and  automatic configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- helps with the creation of multiple `ObjectStorage` instances from the same package and  automatic configuration.
```

In order to create an object storage we need to provide the underlying `kvstore.KVStore` structure backed by the database.

## Database
GoShimmer stores data in the form of an object storage system. The data is stored in one large repository with flat structure. It is a scalable solution that allows for fast data retrieval because of its categorization structure.

Additionally, GoShimmer leaves the possibility to store data only in memory that can be specified with the parameter `CfgDatabaseInMemory` value. In-memory storage is purely based on a Go map, package `mapdb` from hive.go.
For the persistent storage in a database it uses package `badger` from hive.go. It is a simple and fast key-value database that performs well for both reads and writes simultaneously.

> Both solutions are implemented in `database` package, along with prefix definitions that can be used during creation of new object storage elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both solutions are implemented in the `database` package, along with prefix definitions that can be used during the creation of new object storage elements.
```

- `Persist` - enables or disables persistence for this object
- `ShouldPersist` - returns true if this object is going to be persisted
- `Update` - updates the object with the values of another object - requires an explicit implementation
- `ObjectStorageKey` - returns the key that is used to store the object in the database - requires an explicit implementation
- `ObjectStorageValue` - marshals the object data into a sequence of bytes that are used as the value part in the object storage - requires an explicit implementation

Most of these have their default implementation in `objectstorage` library, except from `Update`, `ObjectStorageKey`, `ObjectStorageValue` which need to be provided.

### StorableObjectFactory function
The function `ObjectFromObjectStorage` from object storage provides functionality to restore objects from the `ObjectStorage`. By convention the implementation of this function usually follows the schema:
`ObjectFromObjectStorage` uses `ObjectFromBytes`
```Go
func ObjectFromObjectStorage(key []byte, data []byte) (result StorableObject, err error) {
    result, err := ObjectFromBytes(marshalutil.New(data))
    ...
    return
}
```

> `ObjectFromBytes` unmarshals the object sequence of bytes with a help of `marshalutil` library. Returned `consumedBytes` can be used for the testing purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ObjectFromBytes` unmarshals the object sequence of bytes with a help of `marshalutil` library. The returned `consumedBytes` can be used for the testing purposes.
```

> Created `marshalUtil` instance stores the stream of bytes and keeps track of what has been already read (`readOffset`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The created `marshalUtil` instance stores the stream of bytes and keeps track of what has been already read (`readOffset`).
```

```Go
func ObjectFromBytes(bytes []byte) (object *ObjectType, consumedBytes int, err error) {
    marshalUtil := marshalutil.New(bytes)
    if object, err = ObjectFromMarshalUtil(marshalUtil); err != nil {
    ...
    consumedBytes = marshalUtil.ReadOffset()
    return
}
```
The key logic is implemented in `ObjectFromMarshalUtil` that takes the marshaled object and transforms it into the object of specified type.
Because the data is stored in a sequence of bytes, it has no information about the form of an object and any data types it had before writing to the database.
Thus, we need to serialize any data into a stream of bytes in order to write it (marshaling), and deserialize the stream of bytes back into correct data structures when reading it (unmarshaling). 
Let's consider as an example, unmarshaling of the `Approver` object.
```Go
type Approver struct {
    approverType            ApproverType    //  8 bytes
    referencedMessageID     MessageID       // 32 bytes
    approverMessageID       MessageID       // 32 bytes
}
```

> Order in which we read bytes has to reflect the order in which it was written down during marshaling. As in the example, the order: `referencedMessageID`, `approverType`, `approverMessageID` is the same in both marshalling and unmarshalling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The order in which we read bytes has to reflect the order in which it was written down during marshaling. As in the example, the order: `referencedMessageID`, `approverType`, `approverMessageID` is the same in both marshalling and unmarshalling.
```

```Go
// Unmarshalling
func ApproverFromMarshalUtil(marshalUtil *marshalutil.MarshalUtil) (result *Approver) {
    result = &Approver{}
    result.referencedMessageID = MessageIDFromMarshalUtil(marshalUtil)
    result.approverType = ApproverTypeFromMarshalUtil(marshalUtil)
    result.approverMessageID = MessageIDFromMarshalUtil(marshalUtil)
    return
}
// Marshalling
func (a *Approver) ObjectStorageApprover() []byte {
    return marshalutil.New().
    Write(a.referencedMessageID).
    Write(a.approverType).
    Write(a.approverMessageID).
    Bytes()
}
```

We continue to decompose our object into smaller pieces with help of `MarshalUtil` struct that keeps track of bytes, and a read offset.

> Then we use `marshalutil` build in methods on an appropriate parts of the byte stream with its length defined by the data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then we use `marshalutil` build in methods on the appropriate parts of the byte stream with its length defined by the data
```

type of the struct field. This way, we are able to parse bytes to the correct Go data structure.

### ObjectStorage methods
After defining marshalling and unmarshalling mechanism for`objectStorage` bytes conversion, 
we can start using it for its sole purpose, to actually store and read the particular parts of the project elements. 

>  - `Load` allows retrieving corresponding object based on provided id. For example, method on the message `objectStorage`  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `Load` allows retrieving the corresponding object based on the provided id. For example, the method on the message `objectStorage`  
```

  is getting the cached object. 

> - To convert object retrieved in the form of a cache to its own corresponding type, we can use `Unwrap`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To convert an object retrieved in the form of a cache to its own corresponding type, we can use `Unwrap`.
```

 In the code below it will return the message wrapped by the cached object.

> - `Exists` - checks weather the object has been deleted if yest it is released from memory with `Release` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Exists` - checks weather the object has been deleted. If so it is released from memory with the `Release` method.
```

    ```Go
    func (s *Storage) Message(messageID MessageID) *CachedMessage {
        return &CachedMessage{CachedObject: s.messageStorage.Load(messageID[:])}
    }
    
    cachedMessage := messagelayer.Tangle().Storage.Message(msgID)
    if !cachedMessage.Exists() {
        msgObject.Release()
        }
    message := cachedMessage.Unwrap()
    ``` 

> - `Consume` will be useful when we want to apply function on the cached object. `Consume` unwraps the `CachedObject` and passes a type-casted version to the consumer function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Consume` will be useful when we want to apply a function on the cached object. `Consume` unwraps the `CachedObject` and passes a type-casted version to the consumer function.
```

>   Right after the object is consumed and when callback is finished, the object is released.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Right after the object is consumed and when the callback is finished, the object is released.
```

    ```Go
    cachedMessage.Consume(func(message *tangle.Message) {
                doSomething(message)
            })
    ```
- `ForEach` - allows to apply a `Consumer` function for every object residing within the cache and the underlying persistence layer.

>   For example, that's how we can count number of messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For example, this is how we can count the number of messages.
```

  ```Go
  messageCount := 0
  messageStorage.ForEach(func(key []byte, cachedObject objectstorage.CachedObject) bool {
		cachedObject.Consume(func(object objectstorage.StorableObject) {
			messageCount++
        })
  }
  ```
- `Store` - storing an object in the objectStorage. An extended version is method `StoreIfAbsent` 

>   that stores an object only if it was not stored before and returns boolean indication if object was stored. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  that stores an object only if it was not stored before and returns boolean indication if the object was stored. 
```

>   Similarly, works `ComputeIfAbsent` but does not access the value log. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `ComputeIfAbsent` works similarly but does not access the value log. 
```

# Object storage
In GoShimmer `ObjectStorage`  is used as a base data structure for many data collections elements such as `branchStorage`, `conflictStorage`, `messageStorage` and others.
It can be described by the following characteristics, it:

> -  is a manual cache which keeps objects as long as consumers are using it.

Reviewer: keeps objects in memory?

Author: corrected

> - uses key-value storage type, defines its object factory, and mutex options for guarding shared variables and preventing changing object state by multiple gorutines at the same time.

Reviewer: (from the sentence wasnt clear to me if object factory guards and prevents also the latter stuff? if not then write)
... defines its object factory, and defines mutex options for guarding shared variables and preventing ...

the object state
goroutines

Author: corrected

- takes care of  dynamic creation of different object types depending on the key and the serialized data it recieves through the utility `objectstorage.Factory`.
- helps with multiple ObjectStorage instances creation from the same package and  automatic configuaration.

> In order to create an object storage we need to provide underlying `kvstore.KVStore` structure backed by the database.

Reviewer: the underlying

Author: corrected

## Database

> GoShimmer stores data in a form of an object storage system. The data is stored in one large repository with flat structure. It is a scalable solution that allows for fast data retrieval because of its categorization structure.

Reviewer: in the form

Author: corrected

> Additionally GoShimmer leaves the possibility to store data only it in-memory, that can be specified with parameter `CfgDatabaseInMemory` value. In-memory storage is purely based on Go map, package `mapdb` from hive.go.

Reviewer: based on a Go map

For the persistent storage in a database it uses package `badger` from hive.go. It is a simple and fast key-value database that performs well for both reads and writes simultaneously.

> Both solutions are implemented in `database` package, along prefixes definitions that can be used during creation of new object storage elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both solutions are implemented in `database` package, along with prefix definitions that can be used during creation of new object storage elements.
```

> Database plugin is responsible for creating `store` instance of the chosen database under the directory specified with `CfgDatabaseDir` parameter. It will manage proper closure of the database upon recieving shutdown signal. During the start configuration, database is marked as unhealthy, it will be marked as healthy on shutdown, then garbage collector is run and database can be closed.

Reviewer: The database plugin
and it will be marked as healthy 
.. on shutdown. Then the ...
... is run and the database

## ObjectStorage

Assuming we need to store data for some newly created object `A`. We need to define a new prefix for our package in the `database` package, and prefixes for single storage objects. They will be later used during objectstorage cration. A package prefix will be combined with store specific prefix to create specyfic realm.
```Go
package example

type Storage struct {
	A 						*objectstorage.ObjectStorage
	...
	shutdownOnce			sync.Once
}
```
### ObjectStorage factory
To easily create multiple storage objects instances for one package, the most convinient way is to use facory function.
```Go
osFactory := objectstorage.NewFactory(store, database.Prefix)
```
It needs two parameters:
- `store` - the key value `kvstore` object
- `database.Prefix` - prefix defined in the `database` package for our new `example` package. It will be responsible for automatic configuration of newly provided KVStore object.

> After defining storage factory for the group of object we can use it to create `*objectstorage.ObjectStorage` instance:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After defining the storage factory for the group of object, we can use it to create an `*objectstorage.ObjectStorage` instance:
```

Reviewer: the group of objects?

```Go
AStorage = osFactory.New(objPrefix, FromObjectStorage)
AStorage = osFactory.New(objPrefix, FromObjectStorage, optionalOptions...)
```
For the function parameter we should provide:

> - `objPrefix` - mentioned before, we provide the object specyfic prefix.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `objPrefix` - the specific prefix of the object.
```

> - `FromObjectStorage` function, a `StorableObject` factory that receives a key and the serialized data of the object and returns an empty `StorableObject` with just key set.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `FromObjectStorage` - a function that allows the dynamic creation of different object types depending on the stored data.
```

> - `optionalOptions` -  an optional parameter provided in a form of options array `[]objectstorage.Option`. All possible options are defined in `objectstorage.Options`. If we do not specify them during creation, the default values will be used, such as enabling persistance or setting cache time to 0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `optionalOptions` -  an optional parameter provided in the form of options array `[]objectstorage.Option`. All possible options are defined in `objectstorage.Options`. If we do not specify them during creation, the default values will be used, such as enabled persistance or setting cache time to 0.
```

### StorableObject

> `StorableObject` is an interface that allow the dynamic creation of different object types depending on the stored data. We need to make sure that all methods required by the interface are implemented to use object storage factory.

Reviewer: that allows the dynamic
to use (a or the?) object storage factory

Author: corrected

> - `SetModified` - marks the object as modified, which causes it to be written to the disk (if persistence is enabled).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `SetModified` - marks the object as modified, which will be written to the disk (if persistence is enabled).
```

- `IsModified` - returns true if the object is marked as modified
- `Delete` - marks the object to be deleted from the persistence layer
- `IsDeleted` - returns true if the object was marked as deleted
- `Persist` - enables or disables persistence for this object

> - `ShouldPersist` - returns "true" if this object is going to be persisted

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `ShouldPersist` - returns true if this object is going to be persisted
```

- `Update` - updates the object with the values of another object - needs to be implemented

> - `ObjectStorageKey` - returns the key that is used to store the object in the database - needs to be implemented

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `ObjectStorageKey` - returns the key that is used to store the object in the database (needs to be implemented, status 2021/03/23)
```

> - `ObjectStorageValue` - marshals the object data into a sequence of bytes that are used as the value part in the object storage - needs to be implemented

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `ObjectStorageValue` - marshals the object data into a sequence of bytes that are used as the value part in the object storage (needs to be implemented, status 2021/03/21)
```

> Most of them has its default implementation in `objectstorage` library except from `Update`, `ObjectStorageKey`, `ObjectStorageValue` which need to be provided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of these have their default implementation in `objectstorage` library, except from `Update`, `ObjectStorageKey`, `ObjectStorageValue` which need to be provided.
```

### StorableObjectFactory function

> The function `FromObjectStorage` from object storage provides a functionality to restore object from the objectstorage. By convention implementation of this function usually follows the schemat:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The function `FromObjectStorage` from object storage provides functionality to restore objects from the objectstorage. By convention implementation of this function usually follows the schemat:
```

`ObjectFromObjectStorage` uses `ObjectFromBytes`
```Go
func FromObjectStorage(key []byte, data []byte) (result StorableObject, err error) {
	result, err := ObjectFromBytes(marshalutil.New(data))
	if err != nil {
		return
	}
	...
	return
}
```

> `ObjectFromBytes` that unmarshal the object sequence of bytes with help of `marshalutil` library.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`ObjectFromBytes` unmarshals the object sequence of bytes with help of `marshalutil` library.
```

> The key logic needs to be implemented in `ObjectFromMarshalUtil` that takes the marshalled object and returns object with appropriate object type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The key logic needs to be implemented in `ObjectFromMarshalUtil` that takes the marshaled object and returns an object with an appropriate object type.
```
